Your guide to saving for a mortgage deposit 
Let’s get you ready to start saving for your deposit. 
Buying a house is expensive, especially if you’re a first-time buyer. 60% say the cost of 
raising a deposit is one of the biggest barriers to home ownership, second only to the cost of 
repayments.  
First-time buyers are being squeezed by creeping house prices, the rising cost-of-living and 
historically high mortgage rates. Saving for a deposit is a significant challenge, especially 
when you factor in the other costs associated with buying a home.  
We’ll cover the basics to help you understand how much you need for a deposit and give 
you some essential tips for maximising your savings. 
How much do you need to save for a mortgage deposit? 
In 2024, the average home in England was worth £290,000. The minimum deposit accepted 
by most lenders is 5% of a property’s value so, for the average English home, that comes to 
£14,500. 
But a 5% deposit is likely to limit your options, and you probably won’t be eligible for any 
good deals. A 10% deposit is better (£29,000 for our average home), whilst a 25% deposit of 
£72,500 will help you secure some of the best deals.  
In general, the bigger your deposit, the better the mortgage deals available to you because 
you present less of a risk to lenders. They’ll be more comfortable offering you lower interest 
rates and more flexible terms. 
How can you start saving for a mortgage deposit? 
The first thing to do is set a savings goal which you can break down into smaller, more 
manageable amounts. You could research the average house price in the area you want to 
buy and work out the amount you’d need for a deposit.  
Let’s say you aim to save up £29,000 for a 10% deposit on our average English home over 
the next five years. You’d need to save £5,800 a year, or £483 every month, to meet that 
goal. £483 might be a lot to save on a monthly basis, but it’s an easier number to think about 
than £29,000.  
The next important thing to consider is where to put your savings to maximise their growth. A 
great option for many people is a lifetime ISA (LISA). If you’re a first-time buyer under the 
age of 40, you get a 25% bonus from the government if you use the money as a mortgage 
deposit. You can save up to £4,000 a year, and any interest you earn is tax-free, but you 
must use the money to buy a residential UK property worth £450,000 or less. You can find 
out more on the government website.  
Let’s go back to our £29,000 deposit over the next five years and say you’re saving into a 
LISA with an annual interest rate of 3%. If you saved £333 every month, you’d reach the 
maximum annual contribution of £4,000 and receive the maximum government bonus of 
£5,000. You’d also earn 3% interest on this amount, which brings your total savings to 
£5,150.  
Next year, let’s say you save another £4,000, receive another £1,000 bonus and earn 3% 
interest. Except this time, you’re getting 3% on £10,150 (two years of maximising your 
saving allowance, plus the government bonus plus 3% interest from the first year), so you 
earn an extra £304. If you continued this pattern, saving the maximum £4,000 every year, 
receiving the maximum annual bonus of £1,000 and earning 3% interest, you’d have 
£27,342 after five years. That puts you just over £1,600 away from your savings goal, but 
remember you’d have five whole years to scrape that together from gifts, work bonuses, side 
hustles or other forms of income. 
This example shows how the right savings account can make a huge difference to the 
affordability of saving for a deposit. How exactly you get to your savings goal depends on 
how much you need to save, how long you have to save it and how much you can afford to 
set aside. Our advisers can help you draw up a budget, maximise your savings and set 
realistic goals that give you a clear path towards saving for a deposit.  
Quick fire tips to help you build your savings: 
●  Pick the right savings account. Look at easy access, fixed rates and especially 
lifetime ISAs. Make sure you shop around for the best rates and keep an eye on exit 
fees.  
●  Create (and stick to) a budget. Make it realistic so it’s easier to keep to, and consider 
setting up standing orders so that money is automatically allocated to savings before 
you have a chance to spend it.  
●  Adjust your spending habits. Can you afford to cut back on that daily flat white? 
Maybe you’re paying for a streaming service you haven’t used in months. Identify 
unnecessary spending and reallocate it towards savings.  
●  Look for better deals on your essential outgoings. Review your utility providers to see 
if you can find a cheaper deal on energy or broadband, buy own-brand groceries or 
even shop at a cheaper supermarket to keep costs down.  
●  Explore other income streams. You could sell unwanted items or monetise a skill to 
make some extra cash. Be mindful of your personal allowances though so you can 
keep on top of any changes to your tax bill (and consider talking to an adviser if 
you’re unsure).  
●  Use discounts, vouchers and deals. Even small savings like free postage or 
two-for-one offers can add up over the long term.  
●  Try ‘no spend’ months or weekends. Cover your essentials, see how low you can 
keep discretionary spending and save the excess at the end of the month or 
weekend. Keep it fun by making it a competition with your partner or friends.  
●  Ask for help. You might have friends or relatives who can help you save towards your 
goal, whether that’s with a financial gift or a friendly piece of advice.  
Saving for a deposit can be daunting, but there are lots of small, practical steps you can take 
today that all add up to make a big difference over the long term.  
From budgeting and setting goals to finding the right savings product, our advisers are ready 
to help you conquer deposits and buy your first home. 
YOUR HOME MAY BE REPOSSESSED IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP REPAYMENTS ON 
YOUR MORTGAGE. 
A stocks and shares Lifetime ISA is a medium to long term investment, which aims to 
increase the value of the money you invest for growth or income or both. The value of your 
investments and any income from them can fall as well as rise. You may not get back the 
amount you invested. 
[Trading name] is a trading name of [registered name of appointed representative] which is 
an appointed representative of The Openwork Partnership, a trading style of Openwork 
Limited which is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. 
Approved by The Openwork Partnership on 07/04/2025.